Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to continue learning about Sessions.
Let's dive right in.
So in our previous lesson, we implemented sessions and towards the end we learned that because we were
storing session data in the memory of our server, that meant that any time our server quit or restarted,
we would lose all of that session data.
So let's set things up so that instead we store session data within our MongoDB database.
Not only will this allow our node server to restart without losing our session data, but it will also
help us from an educational standpoint.
It will allow us to visualize or see a session with our own two eyes.
Without further ado, let's get started.
So jump into your text editor, and the first thing we're going to do is download a new package from
npm, so open up your command line apps running Press Control.
See, and let's run this command npm install.
And the name of the package is Connect Dash, Mongo So NPM Install, Connect, Dash, Mongo Press Enter
to install that, OK, then we can tell our server to begin running again.
So npm run watch.
All right, and now let's jump in to our app Typekit JS file and leverage that new package.
Essentially, we're just going to modify our session options here in app D.J.s until it's a store session
data within MongoDB.
So up towards the top, maybe right below this line where we require in express session right below
that, let's add a new line and say Konst, we could name it anything, but let's name it Mongo store.
OK, but let's set this to equal, and then let's require in that new package.
So connect Dash Mongo.
OK, so now that we've set up Mongo Store, we can use that within our session options.
So maybe right below this secret line, let's add a new line, and let's add an option named Store Coleman.
By default, this session package will store session data in memory, but we can override that default
with this option here store.
So let's set this to Mongo Store.
Look inside it for a method called Create.
OK.
Be sure to include a comma at the end of this line.
Now, within the parentheses for this create method, we need to pass it in object so curly brackets
and we only need this object to have one property.
So we need a property named client.
So Client Colon and then we provide it with a MongoDB client.
Now, luckily for us, we've already set up a standalone, reusable file that connects to our database.
Remember, in the root of our project, we have a file named DB Dot Jass.
So let's just import or require in that db js file right here.
So right after the client colon just say required within the parentheses, give it quotes and then just
dot slash to look in the current directory and grab the file that is named DB.
Now there's some good news and bad news.
The good news is that we do have this re-usable database file.
But the bad news is that it's currently set up to export a database, not the MongoDB client.
But I guess there's more good news.
The good news is that this is very easy to fix.
So right now, I want you to do this with me.
I want you to jump in to our DB dot js file.
Within this DB file, I want you to look for the area where we are exporting something.
So it's the line of code where we say module dot exports equals.
Well, instead of setting this to equal client and then dot and call DB, let's just get rid of the
Dot DB call.
So it's now just module exports equals client.
Go ahead and save that, then jump back into our app J.S. file and go ahead and save these latest changes
as well.
Now we just need to make one more change since we changed what our DB file exports.
We also want to update our model.
Let me show you what I mean within the route of your project.
Look within your models folder and I want you to jump in to uppercase user a.j.'s.
Remember, at the very top of this file, we created our users collection variable and we used our reusable
DB file.
And since this file is now exporting the MongoDB client instead of a database, we need to do this right
before this dock collection.
I want you to say dot db and then parentheses to call DB.
So just like this?
Go ahead and save this file and test it out.
So in the browser?
Let's go ahead and perform a successful log in.
So use your correct values.
OK, we see congrats.
And if I go back to the base or root URL.
Welcome to the actual application.
But what's really important here is if we go into our MongoDB Atlas account and click on to the collection
screen, you might need to click this refresh button.
But now notice within our complex app database, we used to only have the one collection named users.
Now we have this other collection named Sessions.
So let's go ahead and click on that to take a look at it.
And within this collection, we do see one document.
So it has one field named I.D..
We will circle back to this value in just a minute or two.
It has an expired field and it also has a field named session.
Now the value for this session field, if we click into this, it's an object.
The first property is cookie, and then it contains the instructions of how the cookie should be created
in the web browser.
So it has the maximum age, right?
We set that to 24 hours.
You could set it to a week or a month if you wanted to, and then if we scroll over further, we also
see this user property within the session field.
So user is set to an object and it has one property named Favorite Color Blue and username is set to
Brad.
Now this data should look familiar to you.
This is what we said back in our user controller.
Remember, we said user dot log in and if the log in is correct and successful, then we set a new user
property within the session object and we set it to equal this object.
Favorite color blue username should be the current username.
So now we are actually seeing that data being stored.
Now let's circle back to the IDE fields or this ID value.
This is the unique session identifier or ID.
And right now, I want to show you something related to this that I believe will make everything crystal
clear.
Go ahead and jump back into the tab where we see welcome to the actual application.
And let's go ahead and take a look at our cookies in our browser so you can right click from this page
and choose Inspect that will open your developer tools, then click on the Application tab in the left
hand sidebar under cookies, select local host column three thousand.
We should just have the one cookie named Kinect port side and pay attention to the value here.
After these initial four values, we can ignore those for now.
After those, you'll see a randomly generated string of characters so yours are going to be different
than mine.
But just for the sake of this video, we see that on my screen.
It's I d8 VR to oh, underscore ZITTI.
You get the idea.
Well, back in our MongoDB database, that is the matching ID, right ID VA VR 2.0 ZITTI, it's a match.
So this explains how the server can now remember or trust the browser session because every time a web
browser sends an HTTP request, it's going to send along with it any and all cookies for the current
domain.
We don't have to write any browser side code to make that happen.
That's just the normal default behavior of browsers.
They always send along their cookies with the request.
So our server is going to see this unique session identifier and it's going to say, Hey, that matches
this session ID in our database.
And the only way a visitor or browser would have this value is if we just send it to them, meaning
we can trust they are the same browser or visitor that just successfully logged in, and we can associate
that visitor with our session data, right?
We created a user property and hypothetically, that current user's favorite color might be blue.
Their username is Brad.
And none of this session data is stored in the browser's cookie.
All that gets stored in the cookie is the unique session identifier, but all of the actual session
data lives on the server side or database side.
Let's run through one more example to make all of this crystal clear so you're already logged in in
one web browser window.
Right now, I want you to open an incognito window or a different browser entirely.
So, for example, this is Google Chrome.
This window is Mozilla Firefox.
You could also just use an incognito window and Google Chrome.
But what I'm getting at here is let's go ahead and register for a new user account within this new browser
session or new browser window.
I will choose a username of Cat.
I'll set my email as Kat at Kat dot com and I'll choose a password of Curti Curti.
Cool, we see.
Congrats!
There are no errors now.
In the future, we will set things up so that if you successfully register, the system automatically
logs you in.
But for right now, we haven't set that up yet.
So now we would need to go back to the homepage and use the top right login form to log in with that
new account.
So it was username Cat Curti, Curti.
OK, so now I'm successfully logged in with that new cat account.
And if I go back to the base URL?
Cool.
We can see the server remembers me.
It says, welcome to the actual application.
And now here's the interesting part.
Back in MongoDB, if we click the Find button to refresh this collection.
Now we see there are two documents in the session collection, so you can see this new document has
a totally different and unique session identifier or I.D..
And if I click into its session value at the end, we see it has a user property, and this time we
see the username is set to cat and I won't bore you with it.
But if I went into Mozilla Firefox and checked the browser cookie, it would have a value that matches
this unique session identifier.
So that's a general overview of how a server can identify or distinguish or trust incoming requests.
Now, for the second half of this lesson, let's change gears, and let's give ourselves a realistic
and satisfying goal.
So when a user is logged in and they visit the root URL of our app, we don't actually want to just
send them plain text that says welcome.
What we would actually want to do is show them in h html template.
That looks like this, and we could even personalize this.
So it uses their real username instead of just this placeholder username.
Right?
It could say Hello, Brad or hello cat.
OK, so serving this HTML template to logged in users is our goal.
Let's get started on that goal.
Now, remember, this is not a course on HTML.
So instead of typing out that template by hand, we're just going to copy and paste it so you can visit
this same GitHub repo from earlier in the course.
Again, the address is GitHub dot com slash learn web code slash JavaScript.
Within this repo, we would want to go into the folder named Oh Too Complex app, and then we'd want
to go into the folder named Oh one HTML templates.
And for the moment, we're interested in the template that is named home logged in.
No results dot h html.
So if you downloaded this repo earlier in the course, just open up that file, select and copy all
of its contents.
Or you don't need to download these files.
You can literally just click on it right here from GitHub.
From this screen, you can then click the raw button.
Of course, this is just the raw code.
Go ahead and select everything so you can press, control or command a on Mac.
Copy that into your clipboard.
OK, and now back in our text editor, let's create a new file within our Views subfolder.
So on the Views folder, I can right click and choose New File.
You can name this file anything but just so we're on the same page, let's name it Home Dash dashboard,
and the file extension should be Dot E.j.'s.
Remember, we're using a template engine named E.j.'s.
OK, now within this brand new empty file, go ahead and paste in your clipboard.
OK, then be sure to save this file.
And now I want you to jump in to our user controller file within user controller, not if we scroll
down to the bottom.
Remember, we have this function called home.
We've already set up if LS blocks here, right?
If the current session has a user object, that means we would want to send them the actual application.
Otherwise, send them the guest version of the home page.
So instead of just sending over this plain text, let's get rid of that.
And instead, we would want to response Dot render within the parentheses.
The name of that new template is Home Dash dashboard.
Let's go ahead and save this and take it for a test drive back in the browser in the tab where I am
logged in if I send a new request or refresh the base URL.
Awesome, we see that template.
Now the question becomes, instead of this place, hold their hair.
How can we actually pull in the correct current username?
Well, check this out back in our code when you render a template.
Obviously, the first argument should be the name of the template you want to render, but we can include
a second argument here so comma.
And now we can provide an object so curly brackets, and now we can include any data that we want to
pass into this template.
You can make up any property names you want, but let's make up a property named username.
And let's set that to the username for the current session.
So we know that we can access the current session from request dot session.
So let's say request dot session.
We're interested in the user property and then inside of that, we know that there is a username property,
right?
And if you were confused, you could always just go look at your MongoDB session document and see this
structure reflected.
So let's go ahead and save this.
And now we will have a property of username available to us from within that E.j.'s template.
So check this out.
Jump back in to that new Home Dash dashboard file and online number 32.
You'll see a heading level two that says hello, and then the placeholder username is wrapped in bold
or strong tags.
So check this out.
Let's get rid of this placeholder username value, and within the E.j.'s template language, you're
free to include HTML.
And then when you want to do something dynamic, when you want to run a bit of JavaScript, you can
just open these tags.
The opening tag is the less than symbol and then a percentage sign.
The closing tag is a percentage sign and then greater than now.
Within these tags, we can run a bit of JavaScript, so we would just want to pull in that username
property now in E.j.'s.
This is how you can do something dynamic or run JavaScript.
But if you want to specifically output something or print something after the opening percentage sign,
you would include an equal sign here.
All right, let's go ahead and save this file and then back in the browser if we refresh.
Awesome, we see.
Hello, Brad.
And if I jump over to my Mozilla Firefox window or I'm logged in as the cat user, if I refresh or send
a new request to the base URL.
Hello, cat!
Cool.
So things are really starting to take shape.
This is starting to look and feel almost like a real application.
And now that we're presenting logged in users with this top right menu instead of the log in form,
I think the perfect next task for us to focus on is the sign out button, right?
We want to give the users the ability to log out or destroy their current session, and that's exactly
what we're going to set up in our next lesson.
So let's keep things rolling, and I'll see you then.